Document create/drop catalog (#19612)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/sql/create-catalog.md

# CREATE CATALOG

## Synopsis

```text
CREATE CATALOG
catalog_name
USING connector_name
[ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
```

## Description

> Create a new catalog using the specified connector.

Author: @dain is the new catalog available for new queries immediately after this query finishes, or is it loaded asynchronously? Either way, is it worth mentioning here?

Reviewer: It is immediately available when the command returns.  Actually constructing the connector is pretty fast.  When you run queries for the first time you can get some slowness as connections are established, and some connectors cache information and the caches would be empty

The optional `WITH` clause can be used to set properties
on the newly created catalog. Property names can be double quoted, which is
required if they contain special characters, like `-`.

:::{warning}
The complete CREATE CATALOG query can be logged, and visible in the {doc}`Web
</admin/web-interface>`. This includes any sensitive properties, like passwords

> and other credentials. See {doc}`secrets </security/secrets>`.

Reviewer 2: We should add an example that does that

# CREATE CATALOG

## Synopsis

```text
CREATE CATALOG
catalog_name
USING connector_name
[ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
```

## Description

> Create a new catalog using the specified connector. The catalog is ready to be

Reviewer 2: Do we really need to say that its ready? If anything we should say that it creates the necessary info on all nodes in the cluster and therefore might take some time.. if that is indeed the case (I mean how long it takes)

Author: This is correct, you can run a query using this catalog _immediately_ after this one completes, and it'll start running, just might be a bit slower.

Reviewer 2: I know .. but do we really need to say that .. its like saying you can look at the results of a SQL query when the results are displayed..

used as soon as this query completes.

> The optional `WITH` clause can be used to set properties

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The optional `WITH` clause is used to set properties
```

on the newly created catalog. Property names can be double quoted, which is

> required if they contain special characters, like `-`.

Reviewer 2: Add something about valid properties depend on the connector .. refer to the docs for those.

Also how does it behave if you create invalid config? Is there any validation or does it just create them and then you have to test if it actually worked afterwards.

Author: Added all of this and a long list of how properties are validated, thanks!

:::{warning}
The complete CREATE CATALOG query can be logged, and visible in the {doc}`Web
</admin/web-interface>`. This includes any sensitive properties, like passwords
and other credentials. See {doc}`secrets </security/secrets>`.
:::

:::{note}
This command requires [catalog management type](/admin/properties-catalog) to
be set to `dynamic`.
:::

> ## Examples

Reviewer 2: Add a super simple example that does not use WITH properties first .. with the tpch connector.

Then add a simple one with the memory connector (use catalog name "brain" maybe like in the book) and the simple config like on that connectors docs for memory allocation.

Author: Done!

> Create a new catalog called `postgres` using the PostgreSQL conenctor:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a new catalog called `example` using the PostgreSQL conenctor:
```

```sql

> CREATE CATALOG postgres USING postgresql

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CREATE CATALOG example USING postgresql
```

> WITH ("connection-url" = 'jdbc:pg:localhost:5432');

Reviewer 2: Expand to use env secrets with username and password and maybe some other postgresql connector config. And explain

# CREATE CATALOG

## Synopsis

```text
CREATE CATALOG
catalog_name
USING connector_name
[ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
```

## Description

Create a new catalog using the specified connector. The catalog is ready to be
used as soon as this query completes.

The optional `WITH` clause is used to set properties on the newly created
catalog. Property names can be double quoted, which is required if they contain

> special characters, like `-`. Refer to [connectors documentation](/connector)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
special characters, like `-`. Refer to the [connectors documentation](/connector)
```

to learn about all available properties. All property values must be varchars
(single quoted), including numbers and boolean values.

> The query will fail if:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query fail in the following circumstances:

```

* A required property is missing.
* An invalid property is set, for example there is a typo in the property name,
  or a property name from a different connector was used.
* The value of the property is invalid, for example a numeric value is out of
  range, or a string value doesn't match the required pattern.
* The value references an environmental variable that is not set on the
  coordinator node.

:::{warning}
The complete `CREATE CATALOG` query is logged, and visible in the {doc}`Web UI
</admin/web-interface>`. This includes any sensitive properties, like passwords
and other credentials. See {doc}`secrets </security/secrets>`.
:::

:::{note}

> This command requires [catalog management type](/admin/properties-catalog) to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command requires the [catalog management type](/admin/properties-catalog) to
```

be set to `dynamic`.
:::

## Examples

Create a new catalog called `tpch` using the [](/connector/tpch):

```sql
CREATE CATALOG tpch USING tpch;
```

Create a new catalog called `brain` using the [](/connector/memory):

```sql
CREATE CATALOG brain USING memory
WITH ("memory.max-data-per-node" = '128MB');
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Note the required use of " for quoting the property name, since the dash characters in the property name are invalid in SQL. The value of 128MB must be quoted with standard '. sin and the required ' to

Create a new catalog called `example` using the PostgreSQL connector:

```sql
CREATE CATALOG example USING postgresql
WITH (
  "connection-url" = 'jdbc:pg:localhost:5432',
  "connection-user" = '${ENV:POSTGRES_USER}',
  "connection-password" = '${ENV:POSTGRES_PASSWORD}',
  "case-insensitive-name-matching" = 'true'
);
```

This example assumes that the `POSTGRES_USER` and `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`

> environmental variables are set on the coordinator node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
environmental variables are set as [secrets](/security/secrets) on the coordinator node.
```

or some similar link to the secrets docs

# CREATE CATALOG

## Synopsis

```text
CREATE CATALOG
catalog_name
USING connector_name
[ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
```

## Description

Create a new catalog using the specified connector.

The optional `WITH` clause is used to set properties on the newly created
catalog. Property names can be double quoted, which is required if they contain
special characters, like `-`. Refer to the [connectors
documentation](/connector) to learn about all available properties. All
property values must be varchars (single quoted), including numbers and boolean
values.

The query fails in the following circumstances:
* A required property is missing.
* An invalid property is set, for example there is a typo in the property name,
  or a property name from a different connector was used.
* The value of the property is invalid, for example a numeric value is out of
  range, or a string value doesn't match the required pattern.
* The value references an environmental variable that is not set on the

>   coordinator node.

Reviewer 3: does the variable not need to exist on worker nodes too? Or do workers get the secret value "inlined" into the config (hence no longer being secrets on the worker)?

Author: It does not need to exist on worker nodes. I assume workers receive already resolved values from the coordinator and store them in memory.

Reviewer 2: Whats what I understand from @dain

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/19883
